Shivaji was the founder of the Maratha Empire. He was born in the Shivneri Fort in Maharashtra probably on 19 February 1630. He is named after a local goddess, Shivai Devi.

Shivaji is one of the revered historical figures of Maharashtra. He created an independent and sovereign state in the Maharashtra region. His mother, Raajmaata Jijabai was the daughter of Shri.Lakhuji Jadhavrao of Sindkhed. His father Shri.Shahajiraje Bhosale was a Maratha general in the Deccan.

Most of the territory in Maharashtra was then under the possession of the Nizamshah of Ahmednagar and the Adilshah of Bijapur who were known as the Deccan sultanates. The Mughals launched a campaign to conquer the Nizamshahi Kingdom. The Adilshah of Bijapur allied with the Mughals in this campaign. Shri. Shahajiraje Bhosale tried to rebel, but he could not withstand the combined might of the Mughals and the Adilshahi. The Nizamshahi kingdom came to an end in 1636. Thereafter Shri.Shahajiraje became a Sardar of the Adilshah of Bijapur and was posted in Karnataka. The region comprising Pune, Supe, Indapur, and Chakan Parganas located between the Bhima and Nira rivers which were vested in Shri. Shahdara as a jagir was continued by the Adilshah. Shri. Shahdara was also given a jagir of Bangalore. Rajmata Jijabai and Chh. Shivaji , stayed for a few years with Shahaji Raje at Bangalore until Shivaji I was twelve years old. Shri. Shahaji entrusted the administration of the Lakshmi jagir to Shivaji and Mata Jijabai. 
Shivaji grew up amidst the hills and valleys of the Pune region under the guidance of his mother Raajmata Jijabai. His mother taught him the stories of the Hindu epics and scriptures such as Mahabharata and also stories of old mighty Hindu kingdoms such as the Vijayanagara. He was also trained in guerrilla warfare. He defeated the Mughal forces of Rai Bagan.
Foundation of the Maratha kingdom

Several small spurs run eastward from the sahyadri in the Pune region. The extremely rugged valleys enclosed by these are usually known as the Mavals or Khores each named after the stream running through it, or after the principal village. Collectively they are known as the Mavals. The inhabitants of this region who are called the Mavalas were extremely hardy people. Shivaji started the work of founding the Swaraj - self-rule - in this region. He used the geographical features of the Maval region. He created a feeling of trust and affection in minds of the people. Many associates, companions, and Mavalas joined him in his work of founding Swaraj. The objective of Shivaji in founding the Swaraj is clearly expressed in his official seal or Mudra which is in Sanskrit. Through this Mudra, Shivaji Maharaj assured his people that ‘ever-increasing like the crescent moon, the kingdom of Shivaji, son of Shahaji, will always seek the welfare of the people.
The Capture of Javali.

The region of Javali in the Satara district was important. Many routes to the Konkan were through Javali. For the expansion of the Swaraj in the Konkan, it was essential to control that region. The region of Javali was ruled by Chandrarao More, a powerful Sardar in the Adilshahi. Shivaji attacked Javali and captured it in A.D. 1656. Then he also captured Rairi. This strong fort, later under the name of Raigad, was to become his capital. He built the Pratapgad fort in the Javali valley to protect the newly conquered territory and to control the Paar pass. The victory at Javali led to the expansion of the Swaraj in Konkan. Shivaji then crossed the Ghats and descended into Konkan. He captured Kalyan and Bhivandi on the Konkan coast which were under the control of Adilshahi. Shivaji also captured forts like Mahuli, Lohagad, Tunga, Tikona, Visapur, Songad, Karnala, Tala and Ghosala, in the Konkan. Shivaji was able to command the coast line because of his acquisition of this territory in the Konkan. He came in contact with the Portuguese, the British and the Siddi powers on the western coast. The Siddi controlled the fort of Janjira and the areas around, including Danda-Rajpuri. Wherever in future these powers created obstacles in the work of expanding the Swaraj, Shivaji tried to curb their activities.
The Establishment of Maratha Navy

